feat: documentation on migrating relationship tuples (#257)
openfga/openfga.dev: docs/content/modeling/migrating-relations.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 10
slug: /modeling/migrating-relations
---

import {
  AuthzModelSnippetViewer,
  CardBox,
  CheckRequestViewer,
  DocumentationNotice,
  ProductConcept,
  ProductName,
  ProductNameFormat,
  ReadRequestViewer,
  RelatedSection,
  RelationshipTuplesViewer,
  WriteRequestViewer,
} from '@components/Docs';

# Migrating Relations

<DocumentationNotice />

> Over the course of a software lifetime, we will need to make changes to an <ProductConcept section="what-is-an-authorization-model" linkName="authorization model" /> and our goal is to avoid service disruption. In this guide we are going to discuss the steps needed when making changes to existing models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the lifecycle of software development, you will need to make updates or changes to the <ProductConcept section="what-is-an-authorization-model" linkName="authorization model" />. In this guide, you will learn best practices for changing your existing authorization model. With these recommendations, you will minimize downtime and ensure your relationship models stay up to date.
```

> ## Before You Start
> 
> In order to understand this guide correctly you must be familiar with some <ProductConcept /> and know how to develop the things that we will list below.
> 
> <details>
> <summary>
> 
> You will start with the _<ProductConcept section="what-is-an-authorization-model" linkName="authorization model" />_ below,
> it represents a `document` _<ProductConcept section="what-is-a-type" linkName="type" />_ that can have users assigned as editor relation. Editor can edit document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites 

This guide assumes you are familiar with the following OpenFGA concepts:

- A <ProductConcept section="what-is-a-type" linkName="Type" />: a class of objects that have similar characteristics
- A <ProductConcept section="what-is-a-user" linkName="User" />: an entity in the system that can be related to an object
- A <ProductConcept section="what-is-a-relation" linkName="Relation" />: is a string defined in the type definition of an authorization model that defines the possibility of a relationship between an object of the same type as the type definition and a user in the system
- An <ProductConcept section="what-is-an-object" linkName="Object" />: represents an entity in the system. Users' relationships to it can be define through relationship tuples and the authorization model
- A <ProductConcept section="what-is-a-relationship-tuple" linkName="Relationship Tuple" />: a grouping consisting of a user, a relation and an object stored in <ProductName format={ProductNameFormat.ShortForm} />
- [Intersection Operator](../configuration-language.mdx#the-intersection-operator): the intersection operator can be used to indicate a relationship exists if the user is in all the sets of users

## Review the existing model

The document below is an example of a relational authorization model. In this model, you can assign users to the `editor` relation. The `editor` relation has write privileges that regular users do not.

In this scenario, you will migrate the following model:
```

</summary>

<AuthzModelSnippetViewer
  configuration={{
    type_definitions: [
      {
        type: 'document',
        relations: {
          editor: {
            this: {},
          },
          can_edit: {
            computedUserset: {
              object: '',
              relation: 'editor',
            },
          },
        },
      },
      {
        type: 'user',
      },
    ],
  }}
/>

There are existing <ProductConcept section="what-is-a-relationship-tuple" linkName="relationship tuples" /> associated with editor relation.

<RelationshipTuplesViewer
  relationshipTuples={[
    {
      user: 'user:anne',
      relation: 'editor',
      object: 'document:roadmap',
    },
    {
      user: 'user:charles',
      relation: 'editor',
      object: 'document:roadmap',
    },
  ]}
/>

<hr />

> In addition, you will need to know the following:
> 
> ### <ProductName format={ProductNameFormat.ShortForm} /> Concepts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - A <ProductConcept section="what-is-a-type" linkName="Type" />: a class of objects that have similar characteristics
> - A <ProductConcept section="what-is-a-user" linkName="User" />: an entity in the system that can be related to an object
> - A <ProductConcept section="what-is-a-relation" linkName="Relation" />: is a string defined in the type definition of an authorization model that defines the possibility of a relationship between an object of the same type as the type definition and a user in the system
> - An <ProductConcept section="what-is-an-object" linkName="Object" />: represents an entity in the system. Users' relationships to it can be define through relationship tuples and the authorization model
> - A <ProductConcept section="what-is-a-relationship-tuple" linkName="Relationship Tuple" />: a grouping consisting of a user, a relation and an object stored in <ProductName format={ProductNameFormat.ShortForm} />
> - [Intersection Operator](../configuration-language.mdx#the-intersection-operator): the intersection operator can be used to indicate a relationship exists if the user is in all the sets of users

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

</details>

> ## Step By Step
> 
> Assume that you want to migrate to the following model:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create a backwards compatible model

To avoid service disruption, you will create a backwards compatible model. The backwards compatible model ensures the existing relationship tuple will still work.
```

<AuthzModelSnippetViewer
  configuration={{
    type_definitions: [
      {
        type: 'document',
        relations: {
          writer: {
            this: {},
          },
          can_write: {
            computedUserset: {
              object: '',
              relation: 'writer',
            },
          },
        },
      },
      {
        type: 'user',
      },
    ],
  }}
/>

> ### 01. Creating a Backward Compatible Model
> 
> To create a seamless transition, we want to create a backward compatible model so that existing tuple will still work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below, `user:Anne` still has write privileges to the `document:roadmap` resource.
```

<AuthzModelSnippetViewer
  configuration={{
    type_definitions: [
      {
        type: 'document',
        relations: {
          editor: {
            this: {},
          },
          writer: {
            union: {
              child: [
                {
                  this: {},
                },
                {
                  computedUserset: {
                    relation: 'editor',
                  },
                },
              ],
            },
          },
          can_write: {
            computedUserset: {
              object: '',
              relation: 'writer',
            },
          },
          can_edit: {
            computedUserset: {
              object: '',
              relation: 'writer',
            },
          },
        },
      },
      {
        type: 'user',
      },
    ],
  }}
/>

> For the above model, check on whether user:Anne can write document:roadmap will produce the correct value while can_edit will still work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Test the `can_edit` definition. It should produce a value of  `true`.
```

<CheckRequestViewer user={'user:anne'} relation={'can_write'} object={'document:roadmap'} allowed={true} />
<CheckRequestViewer user={'user:anne'} relation={'can_edit'} object={'document:roadmap'} allowed={true} />

> ### 02. New Relationship Tuples Should Use New Relation
> 
> After we have updated to the backward compatible models, new relationship tuples should use the new relation.
> 
> For example, we will want to add Bethany to writer instead of editor relationship.
> 
> <WriteRequestViewer
>   relationshipTuples={[
>     {
>       _description: 'Bethany is to be assigned as writer instead of editor',
>       user: 'user:bethany',
>       relation: 'writer',
>       object: 'document:roadmap',
>     },
>   ]}
> />
> 
> We can verify by calling check API for Bethany
> <CheckRequestViewer user={'user:bethany'} relation={'can_write'} object={'document:roadmap'} allowed={true} />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create a new relationship tuple

Now that you have a backwards compatible model, you can create new relationship tuples with a new relation.

In this example, you will add Bethany to the `writer` relationship.

<WriteRequestViewer
  relationshipTuples={[
    {
      _description: 'Bethany assigned writer instead of editor',
      user: 'user:bethany',
      relation: 'writer',
      object: 'document:roadmap',
    },
  ]}
/>

Run a check in the API for Bethany to ensure correct access.

<CheckRequestViewer user={'user:bethany'} relation={'can_write'} object={'document:roadmap'} allowed={true} />
```

> ### 03. Migrating Existing Relationship Tuples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrate the existing relationship tuples
```

> The next step is to migrate existing relationship tuples that have the soon-to-be obsolete relation to the new relation name.  In our example, we can use the read API to lookup all relationship tuples that have the relation name "editor".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, migrate the existing relationship tuples. The new relation makes this definition obsolete.

Use the `read` API to lookup all relationship tuples with the `editor` name in your model.

<ReadRequestViewer
  relation={'editor'}
  object={'document:'}
  tuples={[
    {
      user: 'user:anne',
      relation: 'editor',
      object: 'document:planning',
    },
    {
      user: 'user:charles',
      relation: 'editor',
      object: 'document:planning',
    },
  ]}
/>

> We will then add new tuples as writer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update the new tuples with the `write` relationship.
```

<WriteRequestViewer
  relationshipTuples={[
    {
      user: 'user:anne',
      relation: 'writer',
      object: 'document:roadmap',
    },
    {
      user: 'user:charles',
      relation: 'writer',
      object: 'document:roadmap',
    },
  ]}
/>

> Finally, we can remove the old relationship tuples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, remove the old relationship tuples.
```

<WriteRequestViewer
  deleteRelationshipTuples={[
    {
      user: 'user:anne',
      relation: 'editor',
      object: 'document:roadmap',
    },
    {
      user: 'user:charles',
      relation: 'editor',
      object: 'document:roadmap',
    },
  ]}
/>

:::info

> We should perform write prior to delete so that anne will always have access. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Perform a `write` operation before a `delete` operation to ensure Anne still has access.
```

:::

> We can validate this by running check on Anne.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Confirm the tuples are correct by running a check on the user.
```

<CheckRequestViewer user={'user:anne'} relation={'can_write'} object={'document:roadmap'} allowed={true} />

> We can verify that the old relationship tuple has been removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The old relationship tuple no longer exists.
```

<CheckRequestViewer user={'user:anne'} relation={'editor'} object={'document:roadmap'} allowed={false} />

> ### 04. Remove Obsolete Relation From Model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Remove obsolete relationship from the model
```

> After all relationship tuples with old relation name is removed, we can update our authorization model to remove the obsolete relation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you remove the previous relationship tuples, update your authorization model to remove the obsolete relation.
```

<AuthzModelSnippetViewer
  configuration={{
    type_definitions: [
      {
        type: 'document',
        relations: {
          writer: {
            this: {},
          },
          can_write: {
            computedUserset: {
              object: '',
              relation: 'writer',
            },
          },
        },
      },
      {
        type: 'user',
      },
    ],
  }}
/>

> Once we have done that, the write API will only accept the new relation name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, the `write` API will only accept the new relation name.
```

## Related Sections

<RelatedSection

>   description="Check the following sections for more on how relationship tuples are managed."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  description="Review the following sections for more information on managing relationship tuples."
